and as you know this is great as you
know we and i do mean we have been
trying to get President Obama on the
show for a long time and now my dream
was to have him here in the studio with
you our studio audience maybe next time
for that but the for the interview
tonight we were thrilled to be invited
this week to the roosevelt room in the
White House with the president
I have to tell you that the president
was extraordinarily generous with this
time i wanted to ask him the kind of
questions that we crazy people here at
real-time might be interested in the
kinds of questions he doesn't often get
and two of those we saved to tempt you
to see more of the interview online at
youtube.com slash real-time you can see
me ask the president about atheism and
about why does America need to have an
empire but right now here's the
president three days ago at the White
House
okay here with the president was very
excited to be here I'm going to be very
grateful thank you very much
you must be little wistful you must be a
little like david ortiz about a month
ago where you know you're you're going
on to great things in the next chapter
of your life start hitting and you're
still heading but my feeder but but you
know you'll never quite have a job as
exhilarating
well you know it it is time I tell
people that this has been a great run
I have loved this job I'm not going to
pretend that there have been moments of
great frustration but it is a singular
privilege i am as good a President now
as I've ever been because you learned
stuff every eight years you've sort of
been around the track a bunch of times
but I also see now the wisdom of the
founders that at a certain point you
have to let go for the democracy to work
so we're a week out from the election
and I you're a history buff I think if
when we look back if mr. Trump is
defeated
I'm hopeful that we will be the takeaway
will be that socialism was not such a
dirty word anymore because of our friend
Bernie Sanders and I just wondering
where someone who was accused of the
socialist before what do you think about
the idea that in America yes we're
capitalist but some things just should
not be for the profit motive healthcare
prisons the military elections and i
would add news gathering people say get
the money out of politics i think you
gotta get out at the news business first
remember going to learn anything well
couple Prince's first of all in some
ways the label socialism doesn't make
that much sense in a context where
there's no economy that doesn't have
some socialist elements meaning that
there's some common goods that we all
agree
everybody should have that's what social
security is that's what Medicare is to
some extent that's what public schools
are we all chip in to make sure that
everybody no matter the circumstances of
your birth have these baseline goods and
as you know i felt pretty strongly that
healthcare should be one of those one of
those goods
I've also said in the past that if I
were designing a system from scratch
I would have probably looked at a
single-payer system but we do have
legacy systems and and that's the only
thing that sometimes when I've had
conversations with burning I've said to
him that we don't start from scratch
there there you've got one trillion
dollar healthcare industry for example
and you get a lot of people who are
working for and a lot of special
interests involved and so my goal in the
Affordable Care Act was if i can get
millions more people insurance then
that's my first goal and then the
question is how do we make sure
everybody ultimately gets it because
there are still gaps in coverage i think
the same is true you know when it comes
to some other issues to me I think there
is a pretty bright line around prisons i
agree with you that the criminal justice
system should not be affected by that
the profit motive that this is the
awesome power of the state saying we can
take somebody's freedom away we can lock
them up because they've reach some
part of the social contract that the
notion that you want in you might
incentivize people to lock more people
in or keep them they're longer or not
provide the kind of rehabilitation
services so that they can get out of
there
I think that's a problem and so I'm very
proud of some of the work that we've
been trying to do along these lines
we've got more work to do when it comes
to them the the media that you know
that's a tougher call because look
state-run media that's what they got in
no not state-run but just like it used
to be where it was a loss leader for
that for the network's they didn't have
to make up a profit community is funny
because they had a monopoly though to
some degree right right so they were fat
and happy in this kind of environment
it's hard to figure out how you would do
that but you know the I think the
question I'd have when it comes to the
media is how do we create a space where
truth gets eyeballs and his entertaining
and we can build a common conversation
at a what is true when i leave here one
of the things I'm most concerned about
is the balkanization of the media where
you've got 800 stations you got all
these websites people have difficulty
now just sorting out what's true and
what's not
yeah and if you don't have some common
baseline effects do you eat we can have
a disagreement about how to deal with
climate change but if we have a big
chunk of the country that share just
discounts what 99% of scientists a
completely it's very hard to figure out
how we move the democracy forward
okay let me ask you about a question
that I know people who watch our show
were interested in churches marijuana
reform is that something that you care
about
I did something like they're backwards
now we both made jokes about it but it's
not funny to the people who get arrested
which is over half a million i think
last year it you know you and I both
could have had our lives ruined not
really by smoking it but by being
arrested for it right and you know I
feel like you had a checklist about
let's get rid of a lot of the stupid
stuff like opening up Cuba you know you
came out for gay marriage
I was hoping ending the drug world would
be on that list is on the ballot now in
nine states in a week including
California for recreational and Arizona
and medical in places like North Dakota
isn't time the federal government caught
up to progressive states like Arizona
and North Dakota
well here's what I mean I have always
believed that to the extent that the
society legitimately wants to guard
against any kind of substance abuse that
you treated as a public health problem
look I'm an ex-smoker cigarette smoker
x.x and really yeah i really did you get
that many ride their heights
I thought I got away I i'm sure the heck
out of Nicorette really
but you know what I when I pass
healthcare reform that would I think
right I'd had my last cigarette butt but
the reason is because there was this
enormous public health effort to get
kids not to pick up smoking and to make
sure that parents felt guilty if if they
were passing on that that have it to
their kids and I've and so that's where
I think we need to go with pot alcohol
and so so I don't think that
legalization is a panacea but i think
that we're gonna have to have a more
serious conversation about how we are
treating marijuana and our drug laws
generally ok i want to ask you this
question again it's an issue i think you
don't get asked a lot about but it's
important to my audience and I know
people will roll their eyes and say so
California to ask this but food purity
yeah something that means a lot to me
somehow it got to be elitist or liberal
I don't get that to want food that isn't
full of pesticides food that wasn't
created by torturing animals at in
factory farms is in full of antibiotics
which is a problem in itself
I feel like we're upside down on food we
eat too much corn because we grow too
much corn because we subsidize too much
corn and you know one of the problems
with the Affordable Care Act is that
people were found to sikkre right then
expected right and that's partly versus
the food i think an intensity and all of
work that Michelle's been doing yeah
that was written the food be put more at
the top of the end when when we come to
addressing health care
there's no doubt about it that right now
we got a disease care system we should
have a healthcare system and healthcare
system would include nutrition exercise
but also pushing back on corporal and
and so angry I i think what is true is
that for a long time
agribusiness has a day obviously a
prominent seat at the table in common
it's bipartisan some of the reforms that
we've tried to initiate for example on
the school lunch program had actually
made some progress on this front and
Michelle deserves a lot of credit for it
as do a bunch of organizations that have
worked on this i will tell you and this
may be controversial and in some of your
audience
it is important to look at the science
on this stuff so when it comes to
antibiotics for example the science is
clear we pump our animals full of it and
and that's not just a problem in terms
of what we're in ingesting it's also
problem that more and more you know
bacteria is becoming resistant resistant
to antibiotics but in some cases like
for example the GMO debate it there are
there areas where there are legitimate
concerns there are some areas where the
science seems to indicate well this is
ok we hand out back to the signs that
says it doesn't increase the year while
exactly and they use just as many if not
more perspective well that's so so my
point is what that what we have to be
make sure we're doing whether on the
left or the right is being driven by the
science and if it turns out that some of
these genetically modified foods aren't
healthier aren't more productive and use
more pesticides then we should follow
the science if in some cases they're not
causing any harm
then we should follow the signs there as
well you think we asked too little of
the public and politicians you know of
course are always kissing up to the
public and saying things like if we only
had a government as good as the people
but the people aren't very well-informed
they don't exercise their right to vote
and when they do they don't know much
about it I just feel like we don't we
don't ask the people very much were
afraid to ask the people eat better you
know that the phrase was yes we can and
I feel like they're not pulling their
weight on the weeds a partnership with
you eat better vote more
something I i I'm a glass half full guy
and an optimist about the human spirit
you are right though that people are
busy they're stressed and they don't
have time to follow the intricacies of
some debate around Medicaid or what's
going on in Syria and so part of the but
when i say i wanted government as good
as the the American people what i mean
by that is that i think people's
instincts and their gut what that what
they what they want out of life and how
they want to see people treated is
actually pretty good but the question
then becomes how do we get enough
information in front of them to be able
to make good decisions i I've always
believed that if i could get into you
know if I could sit in the living room
whatever person in America over that
I've got the majority on my side and a
healthy majority on my side on every
issue that we work on just by having a
conversation the problem is we got all
these filters and look at my watch fox
news i wouldn't vote for me either
right because you know you got this
screen this fun house mirror through
which people are receiving information
how did how to break through that is a
big challenge that this whole
conversation that's been had lately in
in the aftermath of the rise of Trump
this notion that part of what's happened
is that both Republican and Democratic
elites have neglected the white
working-class men truth of the matter is
is that every policy i put forward would
make a huge difference with white
working class and the black working
class and the Latino working class
whether it's raising the minimum wage or
the Affordable Care Act given people
health care who don't have it and you're
working hard and and need help or making
sure that unions are our strong so that
you can have a little more leverage at
the workplace or making sure that
you know something like for consumer
finance Protection Bureau is is made is
protecting against some scam mortgage
and what I'd like to figure out and i
think democrats do have an affirmative
obligation to do that do this is is to
work harder to to to to figure out in in
this new age
what's the equivalent of getting into
people's living rooms and being able to
have a conversation and being able to
listen people and great now you're off
to Ohio right you've got an election to
rig and I want you I want you to get out
there because a boy it's it's a very
nervous time for the stick people who
are worried about mr. Trump the the
stakes are high
I i know we you know we were getting me
a we getting that we're getting gone yet
but it's a but I will say this that
choice in this election is should be
really clear and apparent and anybody
who's watching your show and was a
supporter of mine was a supporter of
Bernie's do is a progressive generally
this idea that somehow well you know
both of them have problems and here
nothing will change either listen all
the progress we've made on climate
change Paris agreement hfc agreement
aviation agreement the 20 million people
who have health insurance that right now
that didn't have it before all the
progress that we've made on trying to
check the excesses Wall Street and
dodd-frank and the and the seat consumer
finance Protection Bureau any chance of
immigration reform including the work
that we did to make sure that these
amazing dream our kids all across the
country are now going to college or
serving in our military or not suddenly
deported or at risk of deportation every
single issue that we've made progress on
over the last eight years is going to be
on the ballot in the form of this choice
and i have worked with Hillary Clinton I
know her and she is somebody who cares
about these issues she does her homework
she cares deeply about ordinary folks
her policies are aligned with yours and
mine and yes she is somebody who
believes in compromising that you don't
get a hundred percent of what you want
but you know what that's the way this
democracy and works anybody sitting on
the sidelines right now or decided to
engage in a protest vote that's a vote
for Trump and that would be badly
damaged his country and we began
damaging for the world so yeah no
complacency just to get out there get
out there it
thank you so much did a hell of a job in
this often at night now I speak for
myself and those are
into that you did this anything wrong
wasn't on the show that often i watched
it all the time really well that's nice
to hear
Thank You mr. president appreciates all
right